Day 12 (of Week 4). A1.2(B). 1/14/2015
==========================

## Pronombres de objeto directo / indrecto

|          | directo | indirecto | for reflexive verbs |
|----------|---------|-----------|---------------------|
| yo       | me      | me        | me                  |
| tu       | te      | te        | te                  |
| el       | lo      | le        | se                  |
| ella     | la      | le        | se                  |
| usted    | le/lo   | le        | se                  |
| nosotros | nos     | nos       | nos                 |
| ellos    | los     | les       | se                  |
| ellas    | las     | les       | se                  |
| ustedes  | les/los | les       | se                  |

* for usted: le/les is correct form, but in Latin America, they use lo/los.
* ella works for feminine objects
* can use se to replace 
* gustar/like uses inirect

### Direct objects

Direct object is the noun directly affected by verb
  - Luisa ve **la pelicula** -> Luisa **la** ve.
  - Luisa ve los carros -> Luisa **los** ve.

When person is object, you need to add "a" 
  - Luisa ve a Philip -> Luisa **lo** ve
  - NOTE: not sure how general this rule is.

- **With two verbs, the last being an infinitive**
  1. Place pronoun immediately before conjugated verb
  2. Attach it directly to the infinitive

- "luisa wantss to visit me"
  - Luisa quiere visitarme. OR
  - Luisa me quiere visitar

* When substituting pronoun, it **must** come before the verb.

* **With negative** sentences, the pronoun comes after no
  - No lo explica el problema

### Indirect objects

Indirect objects:
  - say where the direct object is going 
  - answer the question "to/for whom?"

Maria buys a necklass for her daughter
  - Maria compra _un collar_ **a su hijar** (indirect: a su hijar)
  - Maria **le** compra _un collar_.

Maria compra un collar a mi
  - sounds FUNNY.
  - use: Maria me compra un collar

**Can replace both direct and indirect objects**
  1. Maria compra _un libro_ **a su abuelo**
  2. Mario **le** compra un libro
  3. Maria **le** _lo_ compra.
    - but this sounds really wierd to have le / lo, so we use se for indirect.
  4. Maria **se** _lo_ compra

**se for les IF you are also replacing indirect / direct**
  - Maria compra un libro a los ninos
  - Maria se lo compra

- For plural too:
  - Maria compra un libro a los ninos
  - Maria se lo compra

**When you have two verbs and two objects:**
  1. add ONE to end
    - Quiero comprar un libro a los ninos
      - Quiero comprarles un libro, OR
      - Quiero comprarlo a los ninos
  2. add BOTH to end
      - Quiero comprar**telo**
      - Quiero comprar**selo**
        - remember les is replaced with se when doing both.
  3. **do NOT** split pronouns
    - CANNOT do los querio comprorse

## Preferir
  - prefiero, prefieres, prefiere, preferimos, prefieren

## Pasado Perfecto
  - actions that began in the past but are still be happening or relevant in the present

haber + participio (conjugate)
   - haber on its own means "to exist" (hay is a form), but here it is just a form.

conjugation of participio:
  - ar: ado
  - er/ir: ido

- haber conjugation: he, has, ha, hemos, han

- examples: he viajado, hemos comido, has ido Cartegena, ...

- of course there are irregular participio conjugations
  - abrir -> abierto
  - poner -> puesto
  - hacer -> hecho
  - escribir -> excrito
  - vir -> visto
  - decir -> dicho
  - ser -> sido
  
- used a lot in spain (for things in latin america, they'd use simple past)

- ha sido -> has been

¿Que has hecho? - common spanish greeting

## "I have to..." -> Tener (conjugate) que + verbo
  - Tener que + verbo : (subject) have/has to....
  - Conjugate tener

  - Tengo que estudiar... I have to study
  - Tienes que comer... you have to eat
  - Tiene que visitar a la abuela... you have to visit grandma

¿Que tienes que hacer hoy? - What do you have to do today?

## Tener expressions 
  - see sheets
