Day 14 (of Week 5). Group Privates with Oda. A2.1(A). 1/18/2015
======================================
(Daniel) 

- Toucan curriculum: 16 total weeks.
  - A2.1(A)
  - A2.1(B)
  - A2.2(A)
  - A2.2(B)
- C2 is "fluent"

- conversations with the each other
- reviewed Por / Para

## Veces vs tiempo
- veces: "occasions" / "instances"
  - I went to the restaurant 3 times last week
  - I will try three times
- tiempo: concept of time
  - I don't have time

## Comparaciones (review)

Three types:
  1. Igualdad: "as ... as", "as many ... as"
    - caracteristicas: 
      - ... tan + adjective + como
        - soy tan alto como mi hermano: I am as tall as my brother
          - estas tan emjado como yo: I am as angry as you.
        - adjective gender/plurality matches subject
    - cantidades (amounts): 
      - ... tanto/a(s) + object + como
        - tengo tantos anos como mi presfor: I have as many years as my professor
        - object gender/plurality matches object
        - tienes tanta rabia como yo: I have as much anger as you.

  2. Superioridad: "more than" (-er / -est)
    - más + adj. + que: superior
      - Soy mas alto que mi hermano: I am more tall than my brother
    - más + object + de: superie-est
      - Soy el mas alto de todos: I am the tallest of them all

    - Other uses, but not comparison:
      - No tengo mas que $20000: I have no more than 20000. I have exactly 20k.
      - No tengo mas de $20000: I have 20k or less.
        - not common to do tengo tanto como 20.000

  3. Inferiordad
    - Change #2 to mas to menos.
      - tengo menos dinero que me hermano
      - soy menos dineros de todos de Monico.

  Use with constructs but drop mas / menos:

    - (el) mayor: older, sometimes larger
      - Soy meyor **que** mi profesor
      - Soy el mayor **de** mi clase.
    - (el) menor: younger, sometimes smaller
    - (el) mejor: better
    - (el) peor: worse

    - (muy) bonito: pretty
    - (muy) bello: beautiful
    - (muy) lindo: pretty (also has personality traits
    - bellisimo/a(s): really, really pretty

  Aside:
    - bien: well / fine
      - el bien: "the good"
    - buen: good but before noun
      - buen perro
    - bueno/a(s): good but after noun
      - perro bueno
    - mal: adverb for bad
    - mal: bad. adjective before the noun
      - mal perro 
    - malo: bad adjecctive after noun
      - perro malo

### Excercise (see sheet)

1.
  1. Juan tiene tantos padres como Maria.
  2. Ricardo es tan viejo como Rita.
  3. El hombre lee tantos libros como le mujer.
  4. El perrito es tan traviesto como la gatita.
  5. El nino come tantos manzanas como la nina.

------------------------------------------ TODO: I AM REVIEWING HERE

## Pasado Simple o Preterito Indefinido (past simple or past tense)
(Estafania)

  - "Pasado simple" is snyonmous with "preterito indefindio"

  - habl**amos** is the same for present and past simple, so its the context
    in the sentence that matters.
  - accent marks emphasize where you accent when pronouncing
  - if three syllables and no accent, accent goes in middle
  - looks like in general, if there is no accent, emphasis is on the 2nd to last
    syllable.

|                         | -ar          | -er/-ir      |
|-------------------------|--------------|--------------|
| yo                      | habl**é**    | com**í**     |
| tu                      | habl**aste** | com**iste**  |
| el / ella / usted       | habl**ó**    | com**ió**    |
| nosotros                | habl**amos** | com**imos**  |
| ellos / ellas / ustedes | habl**aron** | com**ieron** |

### Useage

  - Can be for recent or far in the past, BUT THE THING MUST END
  - (perfect tense - he hablado) is for things that are still going on

  - express a physical condition that no longer exists
    - ¿Te sentiste mal la semana pasada?

- ASIDE, gustar-like verbs:
  - gustar (like)
  - dolar (pain)
  - encantar (to love)
  - importar (something is importanr)
  - molestar (to annoy)
  - interestar (something is interesting to you)

hace dos meses llegué a Colombia
  - I arrived two months ago in Colombia

### Irregular in pasado simple

- tener
- ser 
- estar
- ir

- ser & ir: fui, fuiste, fue, fioms, fueron
  - which is annoying because ser is NOT for location
  - for ir use **fui a** which is the hint for how to differentiate
    - can use fui a comer

- just because a verb is irregular in present or a past tense, doesn't mean
  it'll be irregular in all

|                         | ir (+a) | irse + de                 | estar      |
|-------------------------|---------|---------------------------|------------|
| yo                      | fui     | yo me fui (+ de colombia) | estuve     |
| tu                      | fuiste  | tu te fuiste              | estuviste  |
| el / ella / usted       | fue     | el se fue                 | estuvo     |
| nosotros                | fuimos  | nosotros nos fuimos       | estuvimos  |
| ellos / ellas / ustedes | fueron  | ellos se fueron           | estuvieron |

* irse is REFLEXIVE (in all tenses), so MUST say me / te /se / nos / ellos
