Day 21 (of Week 6). Solo privates. A2.1(A). 1/27/2015
=========================
(Daniel)

# Talking notes
  - has peleado antes? - have you fought before
  - levantar pesas - lift weights (verb)
  - levantamiento de pesas - lift weights (noun)

  - Creo que si quieres los músculos y ser fuerte entonces necesitas levantar pesas
    - I believe that if you want muscles and to be strong then youneed to lift weights.

  - Esa es la razón por la que este gimnasio es mejor
    - That is the reason that this gym is better
    - "la que" is referring to "la razon". It's "that" (remember when joining two sentences)

  **USEFUL**:
    - Spanish does not have "that is why", they say "es la razón por la que" (that is the reason for that)
    - or "Ese es el motivo por el que este gimnasio es mejor"

# Past perfect v gernudio
  - Desede hace 15 anos estoy yendo al gimnasio.
    - Since 15 years ago, I am going to the gym.
      - You start 15 years ago and still go there.

  - Este ano he estado en el gimnasio.
    - This year is still going on. But the action is finished.

# Soler: to do often (in present

  - Solar: means to do often (frequamente - frequently)
  - Conjugation
    - suelo
    - sueles
    - suele
    - solemos
    - suelen

  - Yo suelo correr todas las mañanas: I run every morning
  - Tú sueles comer en ese restaurante

# Caballo, cabello, caballero
  - caballo: horse 
  - cabello: hair
  - caballero:  gentlemen

# Haber in past perfect
  - conjugated for the object
  - En mi instituto no habieron ordenadores (conjugated for ordenadores)

