Day 7 (of Week 3). 12/22/2015
==========================

## Me Gusta
  - "gusta" does not conjugate (only gusta y gustan)
  - article before: me, te, le, nos, les

  A mi me gusta: for emphasis
    - A ti, a el/ella, a nosotros,  a ellos/ustedes
    - el/ella can replace for noun (A Juan le gusta...)
    - nosotros: A Tom y a mi nos gusta...
    - ellas: (A Tom y a Michelle) les gusta 

  - **conjugate with the object**
    - gusto yo
    - gustas tu
    - gusta ella
    - gustamos nosotros
    - gustan ellos
    For conjugation, use "This movie pleases me".

|             | (optional) emphasis | (optional) alternative emphasis | article proceeding | gusta (conjugates on object) |
|-------------|---------------------|---------------------------------|--------------------|------------------------------|
| yo          | a mi                |                                 | me                 | gustas tu                    |
| tu          | a ti                |                                 | te                 | gusto yo                     |
| el / ella / | a el / ella / usted | a Michele le                    | le                 | gusta ella                   |
| nosotros    | a nosotoros         | A Tom y a mi nos                | nos                | gustan ellos                 |
| ellos       | a                   | A Tom y a Michelle les          | les                | gustamos nosotros            |
    
* If you use I like (person), it probably means crush / love.  

### Verb Type: "Como me gusta"
  - No name for this type of verb - "Como me gusta"
  - Also: 
    - encantar (to love)
    - interesar (to be interested in)
      - A ti te interesa aprender epsanol
    - molestar (to be annoy by / to be bothered by)
      - A ella le molesta el ruido. (she is bothered by the noise)
    - importar (to care about with this structure, normal is to import)
      - yo importo cafe - (import cafe)
      - A me importa la chica (I care about the girl)
      - No me importa (I don't care)
      - No importa (doesn't matter)
    - doler - (o->ue irregular)
      A mi me duele mi pierna (my legs hurt)

* Can also put in the front
  - **A mi perna me duele.**
  - NEVER See "a mi perna me duele [something]"
    
dolor - to feel pain
  Tengo dolor en mis stomacho (I have pain in my stomach)

## Learning Vocab tips

  - **Don't just learn the nouns, learn the verbs / what yoi can do or adjectives.**
    - e.g. Ojos - ver / mirar / observar - 
    - e.g. Boca - comer, hablar 
    - e.g. dientes (teeth) - mordeura (bite), 
    - e.g. language (tongue) - saborear (taste)
    - e.g. labios - besar (to kiss)

  - **If you learn a word, learn verbs, adjectives, etc associated things with it**
    - e.g. Pizarra (whiteboard), learn: to write, white, black, clean, dirty, write...

  - **Before going to do something (e.g. get a haircut), spend twenty minutes looking up vocab for it**

  - **Focus on things you interact with daily. Pick one and do a local graph search of it**

** Use www.wordreference.com for Spanish words **
## External parts of the body

- Head: la cabeza
  - To nod: asentir
    - Asentir con la caveza
  - To shake: 
    - negar (for no): negar con la cabeza
    - asentir (for yes): asentir con la cabeza
  - To scratch:
    - rascarse la cabeza / John se rasca la cabeza
  - smart: intelligente
- Arms: los brazos
  - To throw: lanzar, lanzaro
    - ball: pelota, bola
  - To raise: levantar
    - Levanto mi brazo
- Torso: el torso
  - To beat: gulpear
  - To twist: girar
  - Skinny: flaco
  - fat: gordo
- Legs: las piernas
  - Long: largo
  - short: corto
  - to kick: patear
  - to walk: caminar
  - to run: correr
  - to jump: saltar
- Feet
- Hands
- Ears

## Internal parts of the body

- levantar: to lift, like muscles
- latir: to beat (like heart)
- stomacho: stomach
  - vacio: empty
  - llenu: full
  - doler: ache
- cerebro: brain
  - pensar: to think
  - imginar: to imagine
- lung: pulmon

## Verbos Reflexivos: action that subject does to himself
  - Reflexive means the object and subject are same (subject does to himself)
    - or does to something the subject owns (e.g. brushes his hair

  - **ALWAYS** have pronoun with conjugation
    - e.g. me with llamo, te with llamas, etc.

  - there is sometimes but **not always** a corresponding nonreflexive verb.

### llamar: to call

  - to call on phone,
  - yo llamo a mi hermana

** NOTE **: you can say yo te llamo el professore. The object can come after the subject sometimes. To be clarified later.

#### llamarse (adds pronoun)
  
  - yo me llamo
  - tu te llamas
  - el /ella se llamas
  - nosotros nos llamas
  - ellos se llamas

### leventarse (to lift self)

  - yo me levanto
  - tú te levantas
  - el se levanta

### lavarse (to ash self)

  - yo me lavo los manos
    * with reflexive, impossible to wash other persons hands. So los / mis ok.

### vestirse (to dress self)
  - yo me visto

### irse (to leave; same as salir)
  - yo me voy

### Durchase (to shower self)
  - yo me ducho
  - te duchas
  - se ducha
  - nos duchamos
  - se duchan

### Encontrarse (to meet someone)
  - reflexive

  - Yo me encuentro con Dianna.

### Cepillarse (to brush)
  - teeth or hair

### Other reflxives

  - Banarse - to bath self
  - Ducharse - to shower self
  - lavarse - to wash self
  - cepillarse - to brush (teeth or hair)
  - vestirse: to dress self
  - maquillarse: to put makeup on yourself
  - ponerse (ropa) - to put on
  - quitarse (ropa) - to take
  - moverse - to move self
    - mover (non reflxive): to move something else
  - leventarse - to lift self
  - sentarse - to sit down
  - acostarse - to lay down / go to bed

### Rutinas (routines)

  - todas los dias - every day
  - a vences:   sometimes
  - siempre:  always
  - nunca: never
  - usualmente: usually
  - normalmente: normally
  - casi: almost
    - casi siempre
    - casi nunca
  - Los lunes: EVERY  Monday
  - a las 9:00: AT 9AM
    - a la 1:00: At 1
  - a medianoche - at midnight
  - a mediodia - at noon
  - en la manana / tarde / noche: in the morning, afternoon, at night

#### Homework: write about your routine

Todas los dias, me levanto demasiado temprano! No tengo sonrisa porque 
necessito mas dormir. A las 9:15, camino muy lento a la escuela. Usualmente,
compro cafe de Americano a Tucan cafe. Entonces, el profesore magnifica ensana
nos cosas utils. Despues, me muevo a restaurante para almuerzo y puedo hacerme
vir a gimnasio. Usualmente, bebo cerveza y intento hablar a chicas colombianas.
Entonces, a vences veo a programa de TV pero normalmente acuesto en mi coma dormir.

## Useful Expressions

  - El año pasado / a - last year
  - El proximo / a ano / mes / semana - next year, month, week
  - Hace # dias / mesos / anos / minutos - # days ago

  - aqui  - here
  - acá / aca - (a-kah) here
  - allí / alli - a-jee
  - allá / alla - a-(jah)
  - ahi - (ayee) means somewhere or 'there' but don't use now 
  - ay - excited noise
  - hay - there is
  
